---
layout: default
title: My Quotes
category: Random Stuff
subcategory: Quotes
new-tab-redirect: true
comments: true
---

## My Quotes

So, here are just random quotes that I came up with. Some of them make no sense out of context, and to be honest I forgot the context in half of them. Enjoy, or just be confused!

-----------------------------------
<br />

> **"No knowledge is gained in agreement."**

> "Debate is the key to learning."

> "Pain is used to fuel strength, and strength is used to get rid of pain."


> **"Nobody has a perfect mate, God is single."**  
  9/10/14 Edit: "Nobody has a perfect mate, God is single (and so am I)."

> "A woman becomes well-known by good looks. A man just needs stupidity."

> "An ordinary human chooses a mate completely by the good qualities in the mate. The smarter people care more about the bad qualities they don't have."  
  3/12/14 Edit: "An ordinary human chooses a mate completely by the good qualities they have. Smarter people care more about the bad qualities that their mate lacks."

> **"When you are alone, and nobody's with you, remember that you can always talk with the only person you truly trust. Yourself."**

> "A man does not try to find the perfect woman, yet the woman who is perfect for him."

> "Assumptions are made to be Assumed."

> **"The dictionary tells you the definition, not the meaning."**

> "Memories forgotten are memories not received."

> "Do not reply without anything to say."

> "Truth be told, but never answers."

> "The best way to learn is to teach."

> "Implications are made to be Assumed, don't fall for it!"

> Riddle: "Tell your friend your life's problems, listen what they have to say,  
  yet when you open your eyes and see them in front of you--  
  they act as though it's a normal day."

> **"Do not feel like a good person. Be a good person."**

>> "I prefer to swim when I'm swimming, play when I'm playing, learn when I'm learning, and do social interaction in my free time."

> "If you don't know, then how can you plan?"

> **"Only I know who I am."**

> "Choose to choose your own decisions."

> "Not everything is black and white."

> **"Make sure you always trust yourself."**

> "I prefer editing my own profile."

> "I know when I am Me."

> **"I remember when I used to have bad memory. Nevermind, I forgot."**

> "Don't put your hopes up. The higher up they are, the more space they have to fall to."

> "Knowledge is how much you know. A person who is full of Knowledge, knows a lot. A person who is Smart, understands how to use and access what he Knows. A person who is Intelligent has a lot of Knowledge, and knows how to access and use it efficiently. A person who is full of Wisdom, Analyzes every Decision he makes, Intelligently Using and Accessing his Knowledge."

> "Give Up if you must, but never Give In."

> "The best thing to do with enemies, is to have fun with them."

**"If you have only one right leg, then all legs left are wrong."**

> **"Don't ask difficult questions."**


> "Finding meaning where meaning is not present is simply expanding the imaginary world of which you live in."

> 9/10/14: "You are the most important person in the world."

> 9/10/14: "Everyone is as deep as your best, deepest friend."

> 9/16/14: "One always knows what about they're thinking, but rarely do what they are thinking about."

> 10/1/14 "I look up to people not because they believe in what I believe in, rather because they believe in what I want to believe in."

> 2/9/15 "People do what they want."

> 2/9/15 "Who are you if not yourself?"

> 2/26/15 "Congratulations before the job is done reduces the chance the job will be completed."

[answer to riddle]:meditation
[10/1/14]:when chatting with Ori Klein